                                          JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                                          1




                                             Reliable Clutter Suppression for Slow-Moving Weak Target

                                                                                           Radar Detection
                                                                     Ruihang Zhang, Jiayin Xue, Tingting Zhang, Member, IEEE




                                                                                                       Abstract
arXiv:2509.04309v1 [eess.SP] 4 Sep 2025




                                                   Reliable slow-moving weak target detection in complicated environments is challenging due to the masking effects
                                               from the surrounding strong reflectors. The traditional Moving Target Indication (MTI) may suppress the echoes from
                                               not only the static interference objects (IOs), but also the desired slow-moving weak target. According to the low-rank
                                               and sparse properties of the range-velocity maps across different radar scans, a novel clutter suppression scheme based
                                               on the Go decomposition (Godec) framework is proposed in this paper. The simulation results show that with the
                                               existence of masking effects, the target detection scheme based on Godec clutter suppression can reliably detect the
                                               slow-moving weak target, compared to the traditional MTI-based scheme. Besides, the time consumption comparison
                                               is conducted, demonstrating that the proposed solution is one that sacrifices time complexity in exchange for enhanced
                                               reliability. Additionally, the tradeoffs among the number of false alarm cells, the detection probability and the iteration
                                               times for convergence have been revealed, guiding parameter settings of the proposed solution in practical applications.
                                               Experiment validation is also conducted to verify the proposed solution, providing further insight into the scenarios
                                               where the solution is most applicable.


                                                                                                      Index Terms

                                                   Clutter suppression, Go decomposition, slow-moving weak target detection, Weibull clutter, masking effects.


                                                                                                 I. I NTRODUCTION

                                            The rapid development of the low-altitude economy has promoted the prosperity of the unmanned aerial vehicles

                                          (UAVs) in the daily life, which also brings many troubles at the same time, such as unauthorized surveying and

                                          mapping, interference in civil aviation, aerial photography leaks, etc. [1]. The application of integrated sensing and

                                          communication enables the base stations to position the surrounding objects while communicating with the mobile

                                          users, providing the prerequisite on the infrastructure for detection of targets in civil areas [2].
                                            Slow-moving weak targets, like the UAVs mentioned, are the objects that have small radar cross sections (RCS)

                                          with low relative velocities [3]. Reliable detection of such targets is attractive in many civil and military applications.

                                          One challenge is that in complicated environments, the echoes of the surrounding strong reflectors usually lead to

                                          miss detection of those targets of interest (TOIs) [4]. Various researches have been carried out recently to improve
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                             2




the detection of the slow-moving weak targets. Most of them concentrate on the methods of long-time coherent

accumulation of the received signals, e.g., the Keystone transform, the Radon fourier transform, the fractional fourier

transform, etc. [5]–[9]. Besides, there are also some of them concentrating on enhancing the detection performance

of the constant false alarm rate (CFAR) detectors, such as the compressed sensing CFAR detector, the ordered

statistic of sub-reference cells CFAR detector, the iterative threshold segmentation CFAR detector, etc. [10]–[13].

However, there is another trend to further improve the detection performance by suppressing the strong clutter of

the interference objects (IOs), which is also the main focus in this paper.

  The traditional method of clutter suppression like Moving Target Indication (MTI) makes full use of the difference

between the static and moving objects in the Doppler domain [14]. The authors in [15] and [16] respectively

introduced the application of MTI for pulsed and linear frequency-modulated continuous wave (LFMCW) radar,

for moving target detection. However, when it comes to the slow-moving weak target detection, MTI will suppress

not only the strong echoes from the static IOs but also the weak echoes from the TOIs, leading to the loss in the

detection probability. Therefore, a more reliable clutter suppression method is needed.

  In recent years, a number of low-rank and sparse matrix decomposition (LRaSMD) optimization algorithms

have been proposed, which concentrate on developing fast approximations and meaningful decompositions [17]. Go

decomposition (Godec) is a robust LRaSMD method that can be used for matrix completion, background modeling,

shadow/light removal, etc. [18]. Naive Godec has a high computational complexity due to the singular value

decomposition (SVD), and the authors in [18] significantly reduced its time cost by replacing SVD with bilateral

random projection (BRP). Besides, the power scheme modification is also adopted to achieve faster convergence of

Godec, which also contributes to reducing the time cost to some extent.

  When it comes to the application of Godec in radar detection, the authors in [4] applied Godec to the moving

targets radar detection and compared the results with those obtained by the MTI-based method, demonstrating the

superior performance of the proposed Godec-based method for detecting the slow-moving targets. However, the

time cost of the Godec-based method, which is also an important consideration in practical applications, was not

mentioned. In addition, the authors in [19] noted that finding appropriate values for the parameters of Godec is very

challenging and Godec does not provide any guideline for determining those values, which to some extent limits

the application of Godec in practical radar detection. Therefore, a method for obtaining the relevant parameters of

Godec needs to be clarified to enhance the practicality of the Godec-based method.

  In this paper, we utilized a wideband LFMCW radar for simulation and a pulsed radar for experiment validation.

The main contributions can be summarized as follows:

  • A Godec-based clutter suppression solution is proposed for the slow-moving weak target detection. New

     iteration termination conditions are incorporated into the original Godec algorithm, enabling its application to

     slow-moving weak target radar detection with the presence of statistical clutter. Besides, the time complexity
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                              3




     is discussed. Furthermore, we show that the given solution can be combined with the efficient cell-averaging

     constant false alarm rate (CA-CFAR) for the slow-moving weak target detection.

  • To address the challenge of selecting the sparsity upper bound constraint in Godec, we employ a piecewise

     approach with an auxiliary parameter to reduce the times of traversal in the searching process. Additionally,

     a normalized performance function is introduced to determine the optimal value of the auxiliary parameter,

     thereby achieving the best CFAR detection results.

  • Simulation results are presented to show the reliability of the proposed solution compared to the traditional ones

     based on MTI. Additionally, tradeoffs among the number of the false alarm cells, the detection performance

     and the time consumption are revealed, guiding parameter settings of the proposed solution. Moreover, exper-

     iment validation is conducted, which not only verifies the effectiveness of the proposed solution in practical

     applications, but also provides further insights into the scenarios where the proposed solution is most applicable.

  The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II details the relevant preliminaries. Section III

outlines the principle of Godec and describes the proposed Godec-based clutter suppression scheme, highlighting

the novel parameters introduced into the original Godec algorithm and the methodology employed for searching

the optimal auxiliary parameter. Section IV and V respectively present the simulation results and the experiment

validation, along with a detailed analysis. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper.


                                                      II. P RELIMINARY

A. System Settings

  As shown in Fig. 1, there exists at least one radar, one static IO and one slow-moving weak target, and the

mobile IOs may also exist in the detection area. We define the RCS of the slow-moving weak target as no more

than 0 dBsm, with a velocity not exceeding 1 m/s. Objects that do not meet these criteria are all considered IOs

[20], [21]. To show the masking effects, the range between the slow-moving weak target and the radar is set close

to that between the static IO and the radar. Here we assume that the difference between these two ranges is not

above 1 m. The radar can both transmit and receive signals, and only the line-of-sight (LOS) signals are considered.


B. Signal Processing

  In this part, we mainly discuss the traditional signal processing scheme for LFMCW radar in the slow-moving

weak target detection. The general structure of signal processing is shown in Fig. 2.

  1) Weibull Clutter: Unlike most radar target detection researches that only consider the background noise, this

paper also takes into account the statistical clutter received from the environment, specifically the clutter with an

amplitude that follows a Weibull distribution. Here we consider the generation of the coherent Weibull clutter using
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                                                     4




                                                        Static IO                                Trajectory




                                                    LOS
                                                                                      Slow-moving weak target


                                                                      LOS




                                                           LOS
                                         Radar                                                       Trajectory

                                                                              Mobile IO


                                Fig. 1: Diagram of the slow-moving weak target detection.


                  Received                          FFT over                   FFT over
                   signal                           the delay                  the time
                                   Intermediate      domain         Range       domain    Velocity             Clutter           CFAR
                                 frequency signal                   profile                profile           suppression        detection
                  Transmit
                   signal


                                  Fig. 2: The general structure of radar signal processing.



the zero-mean nonlinear transformation (ZMNL) method [22], and the block diagram is shown in Fig. 3. The real

and imaginary part of the coherent Weibull sequence u and v can be expressed as
                                          
                                          u = x(x2 + y 2 )1/p−1/2
                                          
                                          
                                                                                                                                            (1)
                                                        v = y(x2 + y 2 )1/p−1/2
                                                        
                                                        


where x and y are zero mean joint Gaussian sequences, p represents the shape parameter of Weibull distribution.


                                                                     Zero-mean Nonlinear Transformation




                       x0                           x                                                                       u
                                                                    (·)2
                                Linear Filter
                                                                                               (·)1/p-1/2
                                    H(f)
                       y0                           y                                                                       v
                                                                    (·)2




                  Gaussian White Noise       Coherent Gaussian Sequence                                     Coherent Weibull Sequence
                      z0 = x0 + jy0                   z = x + jy                                                    w = u + jv

                                Fig. 3: Diagram of the coherent Weibull clutter generation.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                         5




  As illustrated in Fig. 3, prior to applying the ZMNL, two independent Gaussian white noise channels are firstly

processed through a linear filter H(f ). This step determines the power spectrum characteristics of the Weibull

clutter, including Gaussian, exponential, and all-pole, etc. [23]. The power spectral density (PSD) functions for

these three types of spectra are presented below:

                                                                                      f2
                                     Gaussian:       Sg (f ) = Hg2 (f ) = C0 exp(      2 )                      (2)
                                                                                     2f3dB

                                                                                          |f |
                                   Exponential:        Se (f ) = He2 (f ) = C0 exp(−           )                (3)
                                                                                         f3dB

                                                                                 C0
                                        All-pole:      Sa (f ) = Ha2 (f ) =          f γ
                                                                                                                (4)
                                                                              1 + | f3dB |

where γ is the exponent of the all-pole model, C0 is the average clutter power, which is expressed as [24]

                                                             2
                                                            wm Γ(1 + 2/p)
                                                    C0 =                                                        (5)
                                                               (ln 2)2/p

where wm represents the median amplitude of Weibull clutter, which is expressed as


                                                       wm = q(ln 2)1/p                                          (6)


where q represents the scale parameter of Weibull distribution. f3dB represents the spectral width corresponding to

the half-power point of the clutter spectrum. As a rule of thumb, it is approximately 3% of the Doppler frequency

of wind [25], which can be expressed as
                                                               2vw
                                                      f3dB =       ∗ 0.03                                       (7)
                                                                λ

where vw represents the relative radial velocity of wind on average, which is the main cause of the Weibull clutter

considered in this paper. λ is the carrier wavelength.

  2) Range-velocity Map: The transmit signal in the m-th chirp of LFMCW radar st (t) is expressed as


                               st (t) = At exp j2π(f0 t + µt2 /2) , (m − 1)Tc ≤ t ≤ mTc
                                                                 
                                                                                                                (8)


where At is the signal amplitude, Tc is the duration of each chirp, f0 is the carrier frequency, µ = B/Tc is the

linear modulation slope (B is the signal bandwidth). Assuming that there are NIO IOs in the detection area, the

received signal r(t) can be expressed as
                                                         NIO
                                                       X                    
                               r(t) = A0 st t − τ0 (t) +     Ai st t − τi (t) +c(t) + w(t)                      (9)
                                      |      {z       } i=1
                                             TOI         |        {z         }
                                                                     IOs
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                                6




where c(t) is the Weibull clutter, w(t) is the background noise, A0 , A1 , . . . , ANIO are the amplitudes of received

signals, which can be obtained by the radar equation [26], τ0 , τ1 , . . . , τNIO are the signal propagation delays, which

can be expressed as

                                                     τi (t) = 2(Ri + vi t)/c                                         (10)


where c is the light speed, Ri and vi are respectively the range and relative radial velocity between the radar and

the i-th object.

  After receiving the signals reflected from the objects, a mixture between the received signal r(t) and the transmit

signal st (t) is conducted, and the intermediate frequency (IF) signal rIF (t) can be obtained, which is expressed as
                                                                        NIO
                                                                        X
                              rIF (t) = r(t)s∗t (t) = AIF0 sIF0 (t) +         AIFi sIFi (t) +c̃(t) + w̃(t)           (11)
                                                      | {z }
                                                                        i=1
                                                            TOI         |       {z      }
                                                                                IOs

where c̃(t) and w̃(t) are the Weibull clutter and noise, AIF0 , AIF1 , . . . , AIFNIO are the amplitudes of the IF signals

sIF0 (t), sIF1 (t), . . . , sIFNIO (t), and the IF signals are expressed as

                                                                             
                        sIFi (t) = exp − j2π f0 τi (t) + µτi (t)t − µτi2 (t)/2 , i = 0, 1, . . . , NIO               (12)


  By sampling rIF (t) and reshaping it into an M × N matrix, the two-dimensional discrete signal matrix RIF (m, n)

can be obtained, which is expressed as

                                                            
                   RIF (m, n) = rIF (m − 1)Tc /M + (n − 1)Tc , m = 1, 2, . . . , M ; n = 1, 2, . . . , N             (13)


where M and N respectively represent the number of samples per chirp and the number of sampling chirps per

radar scan. By performing the two-dimensional FFT after adopting the Hamming window on RIF (m, n), the range

and velocity profiles can be obtained, i.e., the range-velocity map.

  3) MTI: For the slow-moving weak target detection, as the velocity of the target is close to zero, and the static

IOs within the detection area are strong reflectors, we usually need to suppress the strong echoes to guarantee the

correct detection of the weak target. MTI is a common method for suppressing the static clutter, which utilizes the

difference in Doppler frequencies between the echoes of the static and moving objects [27]. By designing an finite

impulse response filter in the Doppler domain, the frequency response of the filter has a deep stop-band near the

zero frequency, thereby suppressing the echoes of the static IOs.

  Many MTI filters have been designed, among which the simplest and most commonly used ones are the single

and double delay-line canceller [28]. The frequency responses of these two cancellers are shown in Fig. 4, where

fr represents the chirp repetition frequency. It can be seen that the more chirps involved in the canceller, the deeper

the stop-band nearby the zero frequency, which is detrimental to detecting the slow-moving weak target. Therefore,
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                                             7




only the single delay-line canceller is considered in this article.


                                                               0


                                                              -10


                                                              -20




                                    Frequency Response (dB)
                                                              -30


                                                              -40


                                                              -50


                                                              -60


                                                              -70
                                                                                                    Single delay-line canceller
                                                                                                    Double delay-line canceller
                                                              -80
                                                                    0    0.5   1           1.5       2           2.5              3
                                                                                          f/f r


                                Fig. 4: Frequency responses of the common MTI filters.


  When processing an M ×N range-velocity map, MTI performs a difference operation between every two adjacent

columns of the matrix. Therefore, the number of floating-point operations (flops) required by MTI to process a

single range-velocity map is (N − 1)M .

  4) CFAR: As shown in Fig. 2, the CFAR detection is performed after the clutter suppression. Two kinds of

CFAR are considered including the CA-CFAR and the ordered-statistic CFAR (OS-CFAR) [29], [30]. The 2-D

detection window of the two CFAR detectors are shown in Fig. 5, where the presence of TOI in the cell under test

(CUT) is determined by comparing its intensity with the average intensity of the reference cells (CA-CFAR) / the

intensity of the k-th strongest reference cell (OS-CFAR). It has been revealed that the OS-CFAR achieves better

performance against the masking effect but higher computational complexity than the CA-CFAR [11], [31].




                                  Range axis




                                                                                   Velocity axis


                                                                        CUT           Guard cells                Reference cells


                              Fig. 5: 2-D detection window of CA-CFAR and OS-CFAR.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                         8




  When processing an M ×N range-velocity map, CA-CFAR requires NR N0 flops to compute the average intensity

of all the N0 detection windows, where each detection window contains NR reference cells. OS-CFAR requires

sorting the intensities of all NR reference cells within each detection window, resulting in O(NR log2 (NR )) × N0

comparisons.


                                III. P ROPOSED G ODEC - BASED C LUTTER S UPPRESSION

  In this section, a reliable slow-moving weak target detection scheme based on the Godec clutter suppression and

CA-CFAR is proposed.


A. Principle of Godec

  For the problem of a matrix X which can be expressed as


                                                       X=L+S+N                                                (14)


where L, S and N are respectively the low-rank, sparse and noise part of the matrix, Godec can efficiently and

robustly estimate the low-rank part L and the sparse part S by alternatively assigning the low-rank approximation

of X − S to L and the sparse approximation of X − L to S [18]. The LRaSMD problem can be solved by an

optimization, expressed as
                                                    min ∥X − L − S∥2F
                                                     L,S

                                                                                                              (15)
                                                                   
                                                      s.t.   rank L ≤ r
                                                                   
                                                             card S ≤ s

where the notation ∥ · ∥F represents the Frobenius norm of its argument, rank(·) and card(·) respectively represent

the rank and cardinality of the matrix, r and s respectively represent the rank upper bound constraint on L and the

cardinality upper bound constraint on S.

  BRP and the power scheme modification are adopted to solve this optimization problem efficiently, and the details

of the BRP-based Godec algorithm can be found in [18]. Here we define ζ (ζ ≥ 0) as the integer exponent of the

power scheme modification. Besides, the decomposition error of Godec ϵ is defined as


                                             ϵ = ∥X − L − S∥F /∥X∥F × 100%                                    (16)


B. Applications of Godec for Clutter Suppression

  As mentioned in [4], due to the low-rank and sparse structure of the static and moving objects in range-velocity

maps across multiple radar scans, Godec is suitable for suppressing the echoes of the static objects.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                                                                                                               9




    1) Procedures: As shown in Fig. 6, we obtain K range-velocity maps through K radar scans, with a time interval

tinterval between each two scans. To fully explore the capability of Godec in suppressing the stationary clutter, the

TOI is required to move across at least one range bin between two adjacent scans. By stacking each range-velocity

map into a column vector and combining K column vectors into a “range-velocity-scan” matrix Xrvs , Godec can

be performed on Xrvs to obtain the low-rank part Lrvs and the sparse part Srvs . Then, by inversely reshaping Lrvs

and Srvs , the static and dynamic parts of the range-velocity maps can be obtained, corresponding to containing the

static and mobile objects, respectively.

                                                                                                                                              Reshape




                       Range                                   1 2 ... k ... K           1 2 ... k ... K   1 2 ... k ... K   Range                                 Range

                        M-1                            Stack                                                                  M-1                                   M-1
                                                                                                                                                                           Mobile IO &
                               TOI + IO                                                                                              Static IO
                                                                                                                                                                              TOI
                           0                                                                                                     0                                     0
                               K-th scan N-1 Velocity                                                                                K-th scan N-1 Velocity                 K-th scan N-1 Velocity
                       Range       .                                                                                         Range       .                         Range        .
                                   ..                                                                                                    ..                                     .
           K-th scan                                                                                                                                                            .
                         M-1                                                                                                   M-1                                   M-1
                                                       Stack
      k-th scan                                                                                                                                                            Mobile IO &
                               TOI + IO                                                                                              Static IO
                                                                                                                                                                              TOI
   2-nd scan                                                                     Godec
                           0                                                                                                     0                                     0
 1-st scan                     k-th scan N-1 Velocity                                                                                k-th scan N-1 Velocity                 k-th scan N-1 Velocity
                       Range       .                                                                                         Range       .                         Range        .
                                   ..                                                                                                    ..                                     .
                                                                                                                                                                                .
                         M-1                           Stack                                                                   M-1                                   M-1
                                                                                                                                                                           Mobile IO &
                               TOI + IO                                                                                              Static IO
                                                                                                                                                                              TOI
                           0                                                                                                     0                                     0
                               2-nd scan N-1 Velocity                                                                                2-nd scan N-1 Velocity                 2-nd scan N-1 Velocity
                       Range            tinterval                                                                            Range             tinterval           Range            tinterval
                         M-1                                                                                                   M-1                                   M-1
                                                       Stack
                                                                                                                                                                           Mobile IO &
                               TOI + IO                                                                                              Static IO
                                                                                                                                                                              TOI
                           0   1-st scan     N-1 Velocity                                                                        0   1-st scan      N-1 Velocity       0    1-st scan    N-1 Velocity
                                                                 R-V-S Matrix            Low-Rank Matrix     Sparse Matrix




                                                                                                                 Reshape



                                               Fig. 6: Diagram of the Godec-based clutter suppression.


    2) Parameters: Since we only perform CFAR detection on the obtained dynamic parts of the range-velocity

maps, and the value of the sparsity upper bound constraint s directly affects the ability of Godec to decompose

the dynamic parts, this paper focuses solely on investigating the searching method for the parameter s. Other

related parameters, such as r, ζ, etc., are set to fixed values. To facilitate the rational setting of s and improve the

efficiency of the proposed Godec-based solution in reliable target detection, the following parameters are added

into the original Godec algorithm:

   • itermax , itercov , δ: Due to the presence of Weibull clutter, the stopping criterion for iteration of Godec in [18]

         is usually not achievable. Therefore, to explore the optimal efficiency of the slow-moving weak target detection

         based on the Godec clutter suppression, three new parameters itermax , itercov and δ, which respectively

         represent the maximum iteration times, the iteration times required for convergence and the threshold for

         the error difference between two adjacent iterations, are added into the original Godec algorithm. Accordingly,

         two additional stopping criteria are introduced in the original Godec algorithm: one is when the number of

         iterations exceeds itermax , and the other is when the difference in decomposition error between two consecutive

         iterations is smaller than δ, and itercov will be output when the iteration terminates.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                            10




  • Nmov : Due to the large number of cells contained in Xrvs , and the fact that one strong mobile IO often

     corresponds to multiple dynamic cells due to its significant spectral leakage during the two-dimensional FFT,

     using an exhaustive searching method to determine the value of the sparsity upper bound constraint s is

     extremely computationally expensive. Accordingly, we employ a piecewise approach to search the reasonable

     value for s in order to reduce the times of traversal, and the obtained value for s exhibit a certain degree of

     robustness to the dynamic statistical clutter in the same scenario.

     Considering the characteristic that the echoes of strong mobile IOs exhibit significant spectral leakage in

     the velocity domain, we define a new integer parameter Nmov (Nmov ∈ (0, M ]) that satisfies the following

     relationship with s:

                                                        s = Nmov × N × K                                          (17)


     In (17), we assume that the horizontal bands caused by the spectral leakage stretch over the entire velocity

     domain, which is the worst situation. Compared to the exhausting traversal of s, the traversal of the integer

     Nmov is much more efficient.

  3) Algorithms: Based on the parameters above, the Godec algorithm adapted for slow-moving weak target

detection is presented in Algorithm 1, where A1 ∈ RK×r and A2 ∈ RM N ×r mentioned at line 3 and line 6 are

Gaussian random matrices in BRP. The QR decomposition mentioned at line 7 is adopted to extract the rank-r

components from Xrvs , and the approximate low-rank matrix is recovered at line 8. At line 9, after eliminating the

approximate low-rank part, the remaining components of Xrvs are sorted by intensity, and the top (Nmov × N × K)

strongest cells are extracted as the components of the sparse matrix.

  As mentioned in [18], when applying the power scheme modification (ζ > 0), the Godec algorithm presented in

Algorithm 1 requires [r2 (M N + 3K + 4r) + 4(ζ + 1)M N Kr](itercov + 1) flops, where itercov has a significant

impact on the time complexity of the Godec-based solution. Besides, there is an intrinsic tradeoff between the false

alarm rate Pfa and the detection probability Pd in CFAR detection. In the proposed Godec-based solution, all these

three factors (itercov , Pfa and Pd ) are associated with the value of s. Therefore, searching for the optimal value of

s (or Nmov ) often requires balancing these three factors, with the goal of maximizing the detection probability of

TOI while minimizing the values of the other two factors as much as possible, thereby ensuring both the reliability

and efficiency of the algorithm.

  We use the average number of false alarm cells in all scans Nfa as the factor for measuring false alarms instead

of Pfa in this paper. Considering the factors related to Nmov mentioned above, we define a normalized performance

function f here to quantify the performance of the proposed Godec-based solution for different values of Nmov ,

which is expressed as
                                                                                
                                    f = 0.5 ∗ 1/itercov + 0.5 ∗ Pd + 1/(Nfa + 1)                                  (18)
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                                11




Algorithm 1 Godec algorithm adapted for slow-moving weak target detection
Input:
    N : the number of sampling chirps per radar scan;
    K: the number of radar scans;
    r: the rank upper bound constraint on the low-rank matrix Lrvs ;
    Nmov : the integer parameter correlated with the sparsity upper bound constraint s;
    ζ: the integer exponent of the power scheme modification;
    ϵ0 : the pre-determined decomposition error bound;
    itermax : the maximum iteration times;
    δ: the threshold for the error difference between two adjacent iterations;
    Xrvs : the “range-velocity-scan” matrix
Output:
    itercov : the iteration times required for convergence;
    Lrvs : the low-rank matrix;
    Srvs : the sparse matrix;
    ϵ: the decomposition error

 1: Initialize L0 = Xrvs , S0 = 0, t = 0;
                                                                      ∥Xrvs −Lt−1 −St−1 ∥F −∥Xrvs −Lt −St ∥F
 2: while (∥Xrvs − Lt − St ∥F /∥Xrvs ∥F ≥ ϵ0 ) ∧ (t ≤ itermax ) ∧ (                 ∥Xrvs ∥F                   ≥ δ) do
                                                            K×r
 3:    Generate a Gaussian random matrix A1 ∈ R       ;
 4:    t = th+ 1;
                                     T i ζ            
 5:    L̃ = Xrvs − St−1 Xrvs − St−1          Xrvs − St−1 ;
 6:    Y1 = L̃A1 , A2 = Y1 ;
 7:    Y2 = L̃T Y1 = Q2 R2 , Y1 = L̃Y2 = Q1 R1 ;
                h           −1 T i1/(2ζ+1) T
 8:    Lt = Q1 R1 AT2 Y1         R2          Q2 ;
                           
 9:    St = PΩ Xrvs − Lt , Ω is the nonzero subset of the first (Nmov × N × K) largest entries of |Xrvs − Lt |;
10: end while
11: itercov = t − 1, Lrvs = Lt , Srvs = St ;
12: ϵ = ∥Xrvs − Lrvs − Srvs ∥F /∥Xrvs ∥F × 100%.




where itercov ∈ [1, itermax ], Pd ∈ [0, 1] and Nfa ≥ 0. The aim of searching for the optimal Nmov is to maximize

f . Accordingly, the details of the slow-moving weak target detection based on Godec clutter suppression and CA-

CFAR can be found in Algorithm 2, in which the process of searching for the optimal parameter Nmov is from

line 1 to line 13.


                                                 IV. S IMULATION R ESULTS

A. Simulation Settings

  In this section, we show the simulation results in typical target detection schemes and the proposed Godec-based

scheme, and demonstrate the performance advantages of the proposed one. As shown in Fig. 7, at the size of

80m × 80m, the simulation network has 1 radar located at the original point. In the detection area, there are two

static IOs, one mobile IO and one TOI. To simplify the problem, we assume that the TOI and the mobile IO are

respectively moving away from the radar at a constant speed. The target and the mobile IO trajectory formed in 10
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                             12




Algorithm 2 Slow-moving weak target detection based on Godec clutter suppression and CA-CFAR
Input:
    M : the number of samples per chirp;
    NG : the number of guard cells;
    NR : the number of reference cells;
    Pfa : the false alarm rate;
    Parameters input in Algorithm 1
Output:
    X0 : the CFAR detection result with the best performance

 1: Initialize Nmov0 = M − 1 and f0 = 0;
 2: while Nmov > 0 do
 3:   Perform Algorithm 1 and obtain itercov ;
 4:                                       Lrv and Srv in K radar scans;
      Inversely reshape Lrvs and Srvs to get
 5:   Xdet = CA-CFAR Srv , NG , NR , Pfa ;
 6:   Calculate the average false alarm cells in K scans Nfa and the detection probability of TOI Pd ;
 7:   Calculate f according to (18);
 8:   if f > f0 then
 9:      f0 = f ;
10:      Nmov0 = Nmov ;
11:   end if
12:   Nmov = Nmov − 1;
13: end while
14: Perform Algorithm 1 with Nmov0 ;
15: Inversely reshape Lrvs and Srvs to get Lrv and Srv in K scans;
16: X0 = CA-CFAR Srv , NG , NR , Pfa .




radar scans can be seen in Fig. 7 as the dash-dotted line. The radar and object simulation parameters are detailed

in Table I and Table II, respectively.


                                           80
                                                                                                     Radar
                                           70                                                        Static IO
                                                                                                     Mobile IO
                                                                                                     TOI
                                           60
                                                              Mobile IO trajectory

                                           50
                                    y(m)




                                           40


                                           30
                                                                                38.5
                                           20                                     38
                                                                                37.5
                                                                                  37
                                           10                                                   TOI trajectory
                                                                                36.5

                                            0                                           43.5 44 44.5 45 45.5
                                                0   10   20      30        40          50     60      70         80
                                                                          x(m)


                                 Fig. 7: Radar detection network simulation in 10 scans.


  The relevant parameters for Weibull clutter simulation can be found in Table III. As mentioned in [24], the

Weibull scale and shape parameter p and q for 24 GHz short range radar are respectively 1.6 and 6.9 for traffic
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                        13




                                                TABLE I: Radar Simulation Settings

                          Parameters          Description                                      Value
                          Pt                  Radar transmit power (dBm)                       20
                          Gt                  Transmit antenna gain (dB)                       20
                          Gr                  Receive antenna gain (dB)                        20
                          N0                  Power spectrum density of noise (dBm/Hz)         -174
                          BW                  Bandwidth (GHz)                                  1
                          fc                  Carrier frequency (GHz)                          24
                          M                   Sampling ADC number per chirp                    1024
                          N                   Sampling chirp number per scan                   256
                          K                   Number of radar scans                            10
                          Tr                  Chirp repetition interval (ms)                   0.1
                          tinterval           Time interval between two adjacent scans (s)     0.5



                                               TABLE II: Object Simulation Settings

                    Object            Range (m)       Azimuth (◦ )   Radial velocity (m/s)    RCS (dBsm)
                    Static IO          16 / 56.7        60 / 40               0                 37 / 60
                    Mobile IO             25              20                 10                    23
                    Target                57              50                 0.5                  -20




road Weibull clutter. Meanwhile, as mentioned in [32], for wideband radar, the PSD of the ground clutter is usually

described by the all-pole model. Thus, an all-pole model with an exponent γ, which is equal to 3, is used as the

PSD of Weibull clutter in the simulation. The probability density function (PDF) and the PSD of the simulated

Weibull clutter can be found in Fig. 8, where the amplitude in Fig. 8a is normalized by its mean and the PSD

in Fig. 8b is normalized by its maximum. Accordingly, the correctness of the Weibull clutter simulation can be

validated, as the PDF and PSD of the simulated clutter fit well with the theoretical ones. Additionally, we define

the clutter power coefficient ξ as the ratio of the clutter power to the weak target echo power, which is equal to

2000 in the simulation. For simplification, complex Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) is considered as the

background noise.

                                           TABLE III: Weibull Clutter Simulation Settings

                                      Parameters     Description                       Value
                                      p              Scale parameter                   1.6
                                      q              Shape parameter                   6.9
                                      vw             Radial velocity of wind (m/s)     5
                                      γ              Exponent of the all-pole model    3
                                      ξ              Clutter power coefficient         2000
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                                                                                                     14




                          2.5                                                                                                1
                                                                               Weibull - Gaussian                                                                 Gaussian - Simulated
                                                                               Weibull - Exponential                                                              Exponential - Simulated
                                                                                                                            0.9                                   All-Pole - Simulated
                                                                               Weibull - All-Pole
                                                                                                                                                                  Gaussian - Theroetical
                                                                               Weibull - Theoretical
                           2                                                                                                0.8                                   Exponential - Theroetical
                                                                                                                                                                  All-Pole - Theroetical

                                                                                                                            0.7
    Probability Density




                                                                                                           Normalized PSD
                          1.5                                                                                               0.6

                                                                                                                            0.5

                           1                                                                                                0.4

                                                                                                                            0.3

                          0.5                                                                                               0.2

                                                                                                                            0.1

                           0                                                                                                 0
                                0   0.2   0.4   0.6     0.8    1     1.2     1.4   1.6     1.8         2                          -100   -50          0          50            100
                                                      Normalized Amplitude                                                                      Frequency (Hz)

                                                          (a) PDF                                                                                (b) PSD

                                                        Fig. 8: Weibull clutter (p = 1.6, q = 6.9) simulation verification.



  The relevant parameters for CFAR detectors and Godec in the simulation can be found in Table IV and Table

V, respectively.

                                                                                   TABLE IV: CFAR Parameters

                                                               Parameters            Description                                         Value
                                                               NG                    Number of guard cells                               8
                                                               NR                    Number of reference cells                           40
                                                               Pfa                   False alarm rate                                    1e-9
                                                               k                     The k-th strongest reference cell                   10




                                                                                   TABLE V: Godec Parameters

                                    Parameters          Description                                                                                              Value
                                    r                   Rank upper bound constraint on the low-rank matrix L                                                     1
                                    ζ                   Integer exponent of the power scheme modification                                                        3
                                    ϵ0                  The pre-determined error bound                                                                           1e-3
                                    δ                   The threshold for the error difference between two adjacent iterations                                   1e-4
                                    itermax             The maximum iteration times                                                                              100




B. Masking Effects

  Here we show the results in the first radar scan as an example. As shown in Fig. 9, the range-velocity map

obtained by the two-dimensional FFT is normalized by its maximum. The intensity of the echoes of TOI is 16.86

dB higher than that of the background clutter and noise. Besides, it can be seen that there are horizontal and vertical
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                      15




bands at the location of the strong IOs in the range-velocity map, which is caused by the spectral leakage during

the two-dimensional FFT. As shown in the enlarged part of Fig. 9, it is difficult to distinguish the TOI from the

spectral extension of the strong IO.




                              Fig. 9: Radar range-velocity map without clutter suppression.


  In this case, CA-CFAR and OS-CFAR are both performed on Fig. 9, and the CFAR detection results can be

found in Fig. 10. It can be found that in all of the 10 scans, neither CA-CFAR nor OS-CFAR can detect the weak

TOI due to the masking effects caused by the nearby strong static IO.




                     (a) CA-CFAR detection result                          (b) OS-CFAR detection result

                            Fig. 10: Masking effects in slow-moving weak target detection.




C. Clutter Suppression

  In this part, we show the performance of different target detection schemes using MTI and Godec for clutter

suppression, and further compare the time consumption of those schemes that are able to detect the slow-moving

weak targets.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                        16




  1) MTI: As shown in Fig. 11, the range-velocity map processed by a single delay-line canceller in the first radar

scan is normalized by its maximum. It can be seen from the enlarged part of Fig. 11 that although the echoes of

the strong static IO have been well removed, the echoes of the slow-moving weak target also suffer an intensity

loss, whose intensity is even 14.88 dB lower than that of the background clutter and noise.




                                  Fig. 11: Radar range-velocity map processed by MTI.


  In this case, CA-CFAR and OS-CFAR are both performed on Fig. 11, and the CFAR detection results can be

found in Fig. 12. Considering all of the 10 scans, the results show that CA-CFAR still cannot detect the weak TOI,

but OS-CFAR can obtain the correct detection results in the 8-th scan, i.e., the detection probability of the MTI +

OS-CFAR scheme is 10%.




                     (a) CA-CFAR detection result                        (b) OS-CFAR detection result

                             Fig. 12: Detection performance with MTI clutter suppression.


  2) Godec: As shown in Fig. 13, Godec achieves suppression of the strong static IOs by separating cells with

constant and varying intensity in multiple scans into different range-velocity maps. Besides the Godec parameters

shown in Table V, there is still a hyperparameter Nmov which determines the sparsity upper bound constraint on
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                           17




the sparse matrix S. Here we assume that Nmov = 18, and it can be seen from the enlarged part of Fig. 13a that the

echoes of TOI nearby the strong static IO are well separated. Besides, in Fig. 13b, the cell on the position of TOI is

highlighted, whose intensity can achieve 17.11 dB higher than that of the background clutter and noise. Compared

with the intensity loss caused by MTI, it can be seen that the proposed Godec-based method can effectively preserve

the echoes of TOI from being suppressed.

  Considering the computational complexity, OS-CFAR is not considered here. CA-CFAR is performed on Fig.

13b, whose result is shown in Fig. 13c, where the TOI can be successfully detected. Considering all of the 10

scans, it can be found that the detection probability of the Godec + CA-CFAR scheme can reach up to 100%.




                    (a) Static range-velocity map                                  (b) Dynamic range-velocity map




                                                    (c) CA-CFAR detection result

                         Fig. 13: Results of the Godec + CA-CFAR scheme with Nmov = 18.


  3) Time Consumption Comparison: For the MTI + OS-CFAR and the Godec + CA-CFAR schemes which can

both detect the TOI, here we give the average running time of ten running tests in Table VI. It can be calculated

that the time consumption of the Godec + CA-CFAR scheme is 93.26% of that of the MTI + OS-CFAR scheme.

However, the time consumption accounted for in the Godec + CA-CFAR scheme does not include the time required

to determine the optimal hyperparameter Nmov . Consequently, in practical applications, the overall time consumption
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                                18




of the Godec + CA-CFAR scheme is expected to exceed that of the MTI + OS-CFAR scheme. This indicates that

the Godec + CA-CFAR scheme prioritizes achieving high reliability in detecting the slow-moving weak targets at

the cost of increasing the time complexity.

                                         TABLE VI: Average Time Consumption

                                  Process       MTI         Godec    CA-CFAR          OS-CFAR
                                  Time (s)      0.0414      0.3378    7.6389           8.5115




  4) Tradeoffs in the Godec-based Solution: When searching for the optimal hyperparameter Nmov , three repeated

runs are conducted for each value of Nmov , as the Weibull clutter generated in the simulation varies with each run.

The average number of the false alarm cells in 10 scans Nfa , the detection probability of the TOI Pd , the iteration

times required for convergence itercov and the average performance function in three runs f obtained by the Godec

+ CA-CFAR scheme with different Nmov are presented in Table VII. From this, the following observations can be

made:

  • Generally, as Nmov increases, Nfa also increases, with a slight decrease observed after Nmov = 100. The

       detection probability Pd reaches its maximum in the range of Nmov = 25 to 30. Beyond this range, further

       increase in Nmov lead to a slight decrease in Pd , and it generally remains above 70%. Additionally, the number

       of iteration times required for convergence itercov increases as Nmov grows.

  • In the table, two tradeoffs can be observed. When Nmov ≤ 30, itercov is always equal to 2, and the tradeoff

       primarily lies between Nfa and Pd . However, when Nmov > 100, Pd changes slightly, and the tradeoff shifts

       to being mainly between Nfa and itercov .

  • In the table, as Nmov increases, f exhibits a trend of first increasing and then decreasing in general, and it

       reaches its maximum when Nmov = 30.

                                TABLE VII: Nfa , Pd , itercov and f with Different Nmov

 Nmov          1        5        8        11        14        18      21        25        30      40      50     100     200
              3.4      5.5      4.8       5.1      6.8        13.1   13.8      15.3      17.4    20.3    21.9    34.5    27.1
 Nfa          3.4      5.8      5.7       6.0      7.5        10.2   14.1      13.9      14.4    20.1    23.8    34.4    26.4
              2.9      4.6      5.7       6.4      8.3        10.3   12.1      13.2      14.6    19.2    24.3    34.8    25.2
               0       0.2      0.2       0.4      0.6        0.6     0.9       1.0       0.8     0.9     0.8     0.9     0.8
 Pd            0       0.3      0.4       0.4      0.5        0.7     0.6       0.7       0.9     0.8     0.7     0.5     0.7
               0       0.1      0.1       0.4      0.5        1.0     0.7       0.7       0.8     0.7     0.9     0.8     0.7
               2        2        2          2       2          2      2         2         2       3       3       4       5
 itercov       2        2        2          2       2          2      2         2         2       3       3       4       5
               2        2        2          2       2          2      2         2         2       3       3       4       5
 f           0.309   0.340     0.348    0.387     0.413      0.462   0.451     0.467     0.474   0.379   0.377   0.315   0.293
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                           19




For the observations above, the following interpretations are provided:

  • For Nfa and Pd : The increase in Nmov causes the intensity threshold for extracting sparse components from

     the range-velocity map to decrease. As a result, more dynamic cells are extracted, leading to an increase in

     Nfa and Pd . However, when Nmov becomes sufficiently large (Nmov > 100), Godec is able to extract the sparse

     components caused by the Weibull clutter, which leads to a huge number of clutter cells appearing in the

     dynamic range-velocity map as shown in Fig. 13b. During CFAR detection, these clutter cells may have the

     masking effects on each other, which results in the decrease in Nfa . Moreover, the numerous clutter cells also

     cause a reduction in Pd to some extent.

  • For itercov : The noise component N with large magnitude will decelerate the convergence process [18].

     Therefore, when Nmov is small (Nmov ≤ 30), the extracted sparse components do not yet include the dynamic

     cells caused by the Weibull clutter. In this case, the intensity of N is relatively small compared to that of the

     extracted sparse components, resulting in fewer iteration times for convergence. On the other hand, when Nmov

     is large (Nmov > 30), the extracted sparse components not only include the TOI but also a portion of dynamic

     cells caused by the Weibull clutter. In this case, the intensity of N becomes more significant relative to these

     dynamic cells, leading to an increase in itercov as Nmov increases.

  • For selecting the optimal Nmov , to make the results more robust, here we consider that any Nmov that result in f

     reaching 95% of its maximum are acceptable. Accordingly, the recommended range for Nmov is approximately

     between 18 and 30 in the simulation.


                                               V. E XPERIMENT VALIDATION

A. Overview

  The data analyzed in this section are provided by a private company specializing in radar target detection, under

a confidentiality agreement. Due to the proprietary nature of the data, the exact identity of the company and further

details cannot be disclosed. Here, we present one of the realistic range-velocity maps, as shown in Fig. 14. After

experiment validation, it was found that there is only one weak mobile IO (UAV) moving at a constant speed of

10 m/s, while the other components are either the static IOs or the uninterested clutter.

  Due to limitations in the experimental conditions, we introduce a TOI aligning with the assumptions made in

this article into the range-velocity map by simulation. The echo intensity of the simulated TOI is approximately

equal to that of the realistic weak UAV on the same range. Generally, as shown in Fig. 14, the slow-moving weak

target detection can be considered from these two cases: one in which the TOI is beyond the horizontal band, and

the other in which it is within the horizontal band. In the following parts of this section, we will evaluate the

performance of the proposed Godec-based solution in detecting the TOI in these two cases.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                       20




                            Fig. 14: Range-velocity map obtained by realistic measurement.



B. Case 1: TOI Located beyond the Horizontal Band

  Taking scan 1 as an example, as shown in Fig. 15, the simulated TOI is located at a distance of 468 m from

the radar, with a normalized intensity of approximately -40 dB and a velocity at 0.1 m/s. The results of applying

CFAR detection directly to the range-velocity map without clutter suppression is shown in Fig. 16. Considering all

10 scans, the detection probabilities of CA-CFAR and OS-CFAR are 0 and 10%, respectively.




                      Fig. 15: Range-velocity map with TOI located beyond the horizontal band.


  The realistic range-velocity map processed by MTI is shown in Fig. 17, and the CFAR detection results can be

seen in Fig. 18. In this case, the detection probabilities of CA-CFAR and OS-CFAR are respectively 50% and 90%,

and the performances of the detection schemes mentioned above are summarized in Table VIII.

  For the proposed Godec-based solution, here we assume Nmov = 3, and the static and dynamic range-velocity

maps obtained are presented as Fig. 19a and Fig. 19b. After CA-CFAR detection shown in Fig. 19c, the detection

probability of TOI can reach 100%, with the average number of the false alarm cells in 10 scans Nfa = 92.7.

Besides, the time consumption comparison of the Godec-based scheme and the MTI + OS-CFAR scheme can be
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                 21




                     (a) CA-CFAR detection result                          (b) OS-CFAR detection result

                                          Fig. 16: Masking effects in experiment.




                                Fig. 17: Realistic range-velocity map processed by MTI.




                     (a) CA-CFAR detection result                          (b) OS-CFAR detection result

                        Fig. 18: Realistic detection performance with MTI clutter suppression.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                             22




                              TABLE VIII: Detection Performances of the Typical Schemes

               Scheme       CA-CFAR only             OS-CFAR only       MTI + CA-CFAR            MTI + OS-CFAR
               Pd                   0                    10%                    50%                     90%
               Nfa                 24.7                  115.1                  21.7                    42.6



found in Table IX, and the tradeoffs revealed in the simulation section can be validated from Table X, where we

can recommend the range for Nmov from 2 to 4. It can be observed that although the Godec-based scheme achieves

a 10% improvement in the detection probability, this comes at the cost of a doubling of false alarm cells and a

significantly higher time consumption. Therefore, when the TOI is beyond the horizontal band, we may recommend

using the MTI-based scheme.




                     (a) Static range-velocity map                                   (b) Dynamic range-velocity map




                                                      (c) CA-CFAR detection result

                     Fig. 19: Experiment results of the Godec + CA-CFAR scheme with Nmov = 3.



C. Case 2: TOI Located within the Horizontal Band

  In this case, we adjusted the position of the simulated TOI to a distance of 1418 m from the radar, with a

normalized intensity of approximately -45 dB and a velocity of 0.1 m/s. By searching for the optimal Nmov , we
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                               23




                                  TABLE IX: Average Time Consumption in Experiment

                                  Process       MTI         Godec     CA-CFAR         OS-CFAR
                                  Time (s)     0.0199       0.2402        4.7611       5.3720



                           TABLE X: Nfa , Pd , itercov and f with Different Nmov in Case 1

        Nmov         1        2         3        4           5        7        10       15       25      40      70
        Nfa        14.5      49.3     92.7      93.5      86.0        73.2     70.0    58.5      47.7    32.0    13.6
        Pd         0.3       0.9      1.0       1.0       0.9         0.9      0.9     0.9       0.9     0.9     0.9
        itercov     2         2        2         2         3           3        4       4         5       7       9
        f         0.341     0.480    0.503     0.503     0.395       0.395    0.354   0.354     0.330   0.304   0.298



found that regardless of the value of Nmov , the detection probability of the TOI was 0. Therefore, we reset the

velocity of TOI to 0.2 m/s, and the range-velocity map is shown in Fig. 20, where we can find that the TOI is

located within the horizontal band.




                      Fig. 20: Range-velocity map with TOI located within the horizontal band.


  In this case, the MTI + OS-CFAR scheme fails to detect the TOI in any scan, with the average number of false

alarm cells across 10 scans being 42.1. Besides, the performance of the Godec-based scheme is shown in Table XI.

It can be observed that the detection probability can reach up to 40% when Nmov = 3 and 4, proving the reliability

of the proposed solution on slow-moving weak target detection. Therefore, compared to case 1 mentioned above,

we may recommend using the proposed Godec-based scheme when the TOI is within the horizontal band.


                                                       VI. C ONCLUSION

  In this paper, we mainly focus on the reliable clutter suppression for slow-moving weak target radar detection.

Specific system settings and the signal processing of LFMCW radar are provided. Besides, a Godec-based method

is proposed to suppress the strong echoes of the static IOs. The original Godec algorithm is extended by introducing
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                                                        24




                               TABLE XI: Nfa , Pd , itercov and f with Different Nmov in Case 2

              Nmov           1          2          3          4          5          6          7         8          10        15
              Nfa          14.4      48.2       91.4       91.9       83.5       79.8       71.5       66.3       68.7      57.0
              Pd             0        0.2        0.4        0.4        0.3        0.3        0.3        0.3        0.2       0.1
              itercov        2         2          2          2          3          3          3          3          4         4
              f            0.266     0.305      0.353      0.353      0.245      0.245      0.245      0.245      0.179     0.154



additional parameters to make it suitable for its application in slow-moving weak target radar detection. To address

the challenge of selecting optimal Godec parameters, we employ a piecewise approach to reduce the traversal

times required for the searching process, and the optimal parameter values are determined based on a normalized

performance function. Simulation results show that, in the presence of masking effects, the proposed Godec-based

solution provides a reliable detection performance at a cost of the computational complexity. Furthermore, there

are two tradeoffs between the number of false alarm cells, detection probability, and the iteration times required for

convergence, which should be considered when selecting the optimal sparsity parameter for Godec. Additionally,

experiment validation of the proposed solution verifies the simulation results and further identifies the applicable

scenarios for the Godec-based solution, enhancing its practical applicability.


                                                                  R EFERENCES

 [1] J. Wang, Y. Liu, and H. Song, “Counter-unmanned aircraft system(s) (c-uas): State of the art, challenges, and future trends,” IEEE Aerospace
     and Electronic Systems Magazine, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 4–29, 2021.
 [2] Y. Wang, K. Zu, L. Xiang, Q. Zhang, Z. Feng, J. Hu, and K. Yang, “Isac enabled cooperative detection for cellular-connected uav network,”
     IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, pp. 1–1, 2024.
 [3] Z. He, X. Chen, H. Zhang, L. Zhang, and C. Zhang, “Long-time integration for drone targets detection based on digital ubiquitous radar,”
     in 2022 IEEE 5th International Conference on Electronic Information and Communication Technology (ICEICT), 2022, pp. 581–585.
 [4] J. Su, G. Cui, T. Li, Y. Fan, M. Tao, H. Wang, and X. Zhang, “A novel multi-scan joint method for slow-moving target detection in the
     strong clutter via rpca,” in 2021 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium IGARSS, 2021, pp. 4787–4789.
 [5] J. Lu, B. Wang, H. Cha, and Q. Liu, “Range migration correction method based on improved keystone transform for gps-based passive
     radar,” in 2022 Photonics & Electromagnetics Research Symposium (PIERS), 2022, pp. 143–150.
 [6] Z. Niu, T. Su, and J. Zheng, “Target detection algorithm for hypersonic vehicle based on wideband radar echo model,” IEEE Access,
     vol. 7, pp. 7678–7690, 2019.
 [7] Z. Zhang, X. Wang, D. Huang, X. Fang, M. Zhou, and Y. Zhang, “Mrpt: Millimeter-wave radar-based pedestrian trajectory tracking for
     autonomous urban driving,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 71, pp. 1–17, 2022.
 [8] C. Xiaolong, G. Jian, Z. Jibin, Z. Yue, and Y. Xiaohan, “Radar fast long-time coherent integration via tr-skt and robust sparse frft,” Journal
     of Systems Engineering and Electronics, vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 1116–1129, 2023.
 [9] J. Shi, J. Zheng, X. Liu, W. Xiang, and Q. Zhang, “Novel short-time fractional fourier transform: Theory, implementation, and applications,”
     IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 68, pp. 3280–3295, 2020.
[10] Z. Cao, J. Li, C. Song, Z. Xu, and X. Wang, “A novel cfar algorithm for multi-target detection with fmcw radar,” in GLOBECOM 2020
     - 2020 IEEE Global Communications Conference, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[11] T. Jeong, S. Park, J.-W. Kim, and J.-W. Yu, “Robust cfar detector with ordered statistic of sub-reference cells in multiple target situations,”
     IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 42 750–42 761, 2022.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021                                                                                 25




[12] W. Yang, M. Ai, F. Wang, Q. Fu, M. Chai, and Y. Zhang, “Multi target detection algorithm for millimeter wave radar based on improved
     os-cfar,” in 2023 3rd International Symposium on Computer Technology and Information Science (ISCTIS), 2023, pp. 442–447.
[13] C. Xu, Y. Li, C. Ji, Y. Huang, H. Wang, and Y. Xia, “An improved cfar algorithm for target detection,” in 2017 International Symposium
     on Intelligent Signal Processing and Communication Systems (ISPACS), 2017, pp. 883–888.
[14] W. Xing, M. Liu, Y. Gui, W. Wang, and C. Hu, “Research on speed measurement in mti radars,” in 2022 2nd International Conference
     on Computer Science, Electronic Information Engineering and Intelligent Control Technology (CEI), 2022, pp. 237–241.
[15] M. I. Skolnik et al., Introduction to radar systems.   McGraw-hill New York, 1980, vol. 3.
[16] M. Ash, M. Ritchie, and K. Chetty, “On the application of digital moving target indication techniques to short-range fmcw radar data,”
     IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 4167–4175, 2018.
[17] Y. Zhang, B. Du, L. Zhang, and S. Wang, “A low-rank and sparse matrix decomposition-based mahalanobis distance method for
     hyperspectral anomaly detection,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1376–1389, 2016.
[18] T. Zhou and D. Tao, “Godec: Randomized low-rank & sparse matrix decomposition in noisy case,” in Proceedings of the 28th International
     Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2011, 2011.
[19] C.-I. Chang and J. Chen, “Orthogonal subspace projection using data sphering and low-rank and sparse matrix decomposition for
     hyperspectral target detection,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 8704–8722, 2021.
[20] Y. Yang, X.-S. Wang, Y.-Z. Li, and L.-F. Shi, “Rcs measurements and isar images of fixed-wing uav for fully polarimetric radar,” in 2019
     International Radar Conference (RADAR), 2019, pp. 1–5.
[21] M. Pieraccini, L. Miccinesi, and N. Rojhani, “Rcs measurements and isar images of small uavs,” IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems
     Magazine, vol. 32, no. 9, pp. 28–32, 2017.
[22] S. Huang, J. Bao, Y. Hu, C. Liu, H. Chen, D. Fu, R. Yu, and T. J. Cui, “An experimental platform to simulate real-time correlated sea
     clutter based on space-time-coding digital metasurfaces,” IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters, vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 1675–1679,
     2024.
[23] A. Melebari, M. Y. Abdul Gaffar, and J. J. Strydom, “Analysis of high resolution land clutter using an x-band radar,” in 2015 IEEE Radar
     Conference, 2015, pp. 139–144.
[24] P. Surendran, S. J. Ko, C. U. Kang, and J. H. Lee, “Performance of uwb short range radar in weibull clutter environment,” in 2012 9th
     European Radar Conference, 2012, pp. 194–197.
[25] Y. Zhang, “Modeling and simulation study for radar clutter,” Master’s thesis, Northeastern University, 5 2008.
[26] M. I. Skolnik, “Radar handbook,” 1970.
[27] M. Mao and X. Han, “Optimization research on radar signal processing technology based on mti-mtd,” in 2023 IEEE 3rd International
     Conference on Data Science and Computer Application (ICDSCA), 2023, pp. 480–486.
[28] A. Ghorbani, S. M. Karbasi, and M. M. Nayebi, “A genetic approach to mti filter design with nonuniform sampling,” in 2020 IEEE Radar
     Conference (RadarConf20), 2020, pp. 1–6.
[29] M. Zhang and X. Li, “An efficient real-time two-dimensional ca-cfar hardware engine,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Electron
     Devices and Solid-State Circuits (EDSSC), 2019, pp. 1–3.
[30] A. Safa, T. Verbelen, L. Keuninckx, I. Ocket, M. Hartmann, A. Bourdoux, F. Catthoor, and G. G. E. Gielen, “A low-complexity radar
     detector outperforming os-cfar for indoor drone obstacle avoidance,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and
     Remote Sensing, vol. 14, pp. 9162–9175, 2021.
[31] M. Kronauge and H. Rohling, “Fast two-dimensional cfar procedure,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 49,
     no. 3, pp. 1817–1823, 2013.
[32] L. Jin, D. Fengzhou, and L. Hongwei, “Analysis of wideband radar clutter and moving target detection based on real data,” CHINESE
     JOURNAL OF RADIO SCIENCE, vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 884–889, 2015.
